---
layout: post
title: "Kemba: A hybrid legged robot"
date: 2022-12-27 10:00:00
description: My masters thesis project
categories: Mechanical Electronics Robotics
thumbnail: assets/img/kemba/cover.jpeg
---

For my masters in UCT's [robotics lab](https://www.africanroboticsunit.com) I built and designed the control algorithms for a legged robot which we affectionately called Kemba. The design, simulation and control aspects of this project are best documented in my [MSc thesis](https://chrismailer.github.io/assets/pdf/mailer-masters-thesis.pdf). Our goal with Kemba was to combine the best of two actuation schemes with pneumatically actuated knees for simple, powerful, compliant, and impact resistant actuation, and proprioceptive electric actuators at the shoulder and hip for high bandwidth torque control and foot placement. Kemba is capable of bounding at up to 1.7m/s with a full flight phase, jumping just under 1m high (2.2 times it’s nominal leg length), and accelerating from rest into a top speed bound in only 2 strides and under half a second.

Here are videos of Kemba accelerating from rest and bounding around the lab on the [planarising boom](https://chrismailer.github.io/projects/boom/) I also built.
<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-6 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include youtube.html id="KZ1mVP8R52g" %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-6 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include youtube.html id="u2Hn26uojoM" %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    A video of the robot accelerating from rest directly into a fast bound and running around the lab on the planarising boom.
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/kemba/leg-parts.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Freshly machined aluminium parts for the legs.
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/kemba/leg-open.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Partially disassembled leg with second femur half removed showing piston closed kinematic chain arrangement.
</div>

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-9 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/kemba/tibia.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-3 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/kemba/tibia-section.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Tibia with press fit bearings and foot (Left) and section view showing I-beam cross section (Right).
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/kemba/femur-halves.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Separated femur halves with inserted steel knee shaft showing internal thin walled box shape and fastener bosses.
</div>

<div class="row justify-content-sm-center">
    <div class="col-sm-8 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/kemba/knee-joint.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm-4 mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/kemba/knee-section.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Exposed knee joint (Left) and cross section (Right) showing the bearings in red, tibia in green, femur in blue, and hollow steel knee shaft in yellow.
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/kemba/body.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Sheet metal halves which make up the front (Top) and back (Bottom) of the body with mounted hip motors, solenoid valves, and signal DIN connectors.
</div>

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/kemba/gim-motor.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/kemba/gim-rotor.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/kemba/gim-inside.jpeg" title="example image" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    GIM8115-6 actuator (Left) with casing removed to show the back of the rotor (Middle) and it’s large 19mm stack length (Right).
</div>
